a spinning column of flame
rises above the ground catching burning
debris and throwing it all around
it's known as a fire whirl that can grow
into a fire tornado
it's 2 000 degrees fahrenheit hot as
powerful as a regular tornado
and it won't stop before anything it can
burn up an entire village in a matter of
seconds
and can't be put down directly
raging winds thunderstorms and hail
powerful lightnings rushing your way
from
every direction that's what a water
spout is about
it's strong enough to sink ships in
seconds and that makes it perhaps the
most
devastatingly natural cataclysm on water
those liquid tornadoes are so crafty
they aren't just born in storms
but also appear over perfectly calm open
ocean
watch out
[Music]
regular tornadoes moving at the speed of
250 miles per hour aren't any less
dangerous
the sky becomes sinister dark with a
shade of greenish
a funnel of crazily spinning air
stretches from the thunderstorm and
all the way to the ground hail the size
of golf balls often comes with it
sounds like a train approaching your way
it flips trucks and houses and nothing
can stop it
all this happens when warm humid air
collides with cold dry air
huge masses of snow and ice rush down a
mountain slope at a speed of cars going
down the highway
there's no way to stop an avalanche or
control it
when some unlucky fellow gets locked
under it they can rarely survive
over an hour humans are to blame for 90
percent of all avalanches
but they're still unpredictable
the odds of getting struck by lightning
are about one in a million in a lifetime
those odds are much higher on lake
maracaibo in venezuela
also known as the lightning capital of
the world
here thunderstorms burst the skies 300
days a year
electrical bolts travel at the speed of
000 miles per hour they're charged with
300 kilovolts
and are way too risky for humans
a river of debris and mud known as a
mudslide
is rushing from a mountaintop onto the
city
long periods of heavy rains can be a
warning sign of them
and the only way to protect yourself is
to be alert and evacuate at the first
signs of it
the most destructive mudslides are
caused by erupting volcanoes and
wildfires
that eat up vegetation and free the road
for mud and debris
the sea turns sinister red and no living
being can survive in it
must be some dark magic in fact it's
tiny
algae that spread uncontrollably giving
the water this specific tint
called the red tide they have toxins
that destroy sea mammals birds and
turtles
as well as the creatures that feed on
them for humans
contact with it ends in breathing
problems or seafood poisoning
after an earthquake or volcanic eruption
devastating debris and rocks turn entire
towns into nothing
the name for this disaster is a
landslide
some of them rapidly move from the
mountains others
are slow but are just as good at taking
down property and lives
every year the damage they bring adds up
to billions of dollars
roads are often ruined and fresh
drinking water becomes a luxury
you're sitting in your home having
breakfast when suddenly the ground opens
up
and swallows it completely leaving you
only seconds to run away
sinkholes happen when the water erodes
underground rock layers
they can happen suddenly or form
gradually and send warning signs
a sinkhole can also release toxic gases
from under the ground
making it even more catastrophic
sometimes even huge ships sink in the
open seas for no visible reason
the reason is often the pockets of
bubbles that underwater volcanoes
produce
even while they're sleeping those
productive magma factories are hidden
under 8
500 feet of water when they wake up they
act just like land volcanoes
and they can cause destructive tsunamis
when the winds and ocean currents turn
into beasts
they have the power of moving entire
walls of ice
30 feet tall onto land it happens mostly
in early spring
when the ice is thawing but hasn't
melted yet
nothing can stop those ice tsunamis on
their way of destruction
[Music]
on a fine summer evening of 1854
the american ship shooting star was on
its way to indonesia
suddenly the ocean in front of it turned
white
was it some mysterious sea monster or
maybe mermaid tricks
the sailors dubbed it milky sea all that
white glow
was caused by billions of trillions of
shiny bacteria in the water and it still
happens today
powerful storms and cyclones can turn
the sea into a giant bath
filled with foam when that foam moves
ashore
it fills a whole town luckily foamy
storms are extremely rare
they might look harmless but have the
power of destroying property
causing floods and taking lives plus
they bring a scary surprise of sea
snakes on land
it spreads in a matter of minutes
covering huge areas with its hungry
flames
a wildfire can reach the speed of 14
miles per hour
and it's easily the most feared natural
disaster
it affects people's lives thousands of
miles away
polluting the air and causing breathing
problems
even advanced technologies can't predict
it and controlling it
is also near impossible
in the hottest and one of the driest
places on earth
africa's danakil desert temperatures
often rise above 120 degrees fahrenheit
the out-of-this-world landscape has many
active volcanoes and geysers
that spit out toxic gases like chlorine
and sulfur
the vibrantly green electric blue and
yellow waters
are all rain and seawater warmed up by
magma
one wrong step here and you'd be gone
for good
when tectonic plates that make up the
earth's surface
clash waves of powerful energy get out
this is how an earthquake is born also
known as the most common and devastating
natural phenomenon on this planet
thousands of them happen every year and
as they cause tsunamis
landslides fire and famine the damage is
always huge
fires bursting in the night sky combined
with multiple bolts of lightning coming
out of it at the same time
a volcanic lightning is a spectacular
fusion
of flash and ash scientists are still
guessing how it's born
most likely it's because there's a
buildup of static electricity
inside a volcano during eruption from
friction of ash
hundreds or even millions of birds
starlings blackbirds and whatnot
flock together in a sky dance they seem
to cover the entire sky
and the sun disappears when they rise
it's called a murmuration
and you're most likely to spot it in
england it won't do you much harm
unless you're in a plane that would have
to reroute or make an emergency landing
no fun
[Music]
when frozen methane in the siberian
permafrost melts
it transforms into gas and boom
there's eventually so much of it the
ground explodes
it leaves behind huge craters changing
the ecosystem of tundra
no one knows when it's going to pass the
point of no return
there's a bright red lake in tanzania
called natron
and it seems serene and peaceful but
don't be fooled
the shallow waters of this place are so
alkaline
they burn like sulfuric acid in fact any
living being that's not adapted to such
conditions
is doomed if you just want to see it you
won't be there too long
the odor of hydrogen sulfide it
evaporates
is unbearable well that stinks
high in the sky near the poles in cold
and dry air
there are colorful clouds that look
somewhat like aurora borealis
the beams of the rising or setting sun
are glowing through the clouds when they
float above it
it looks gorgeous and harmless but is in
fact a factory for chemical reactions
that slowly destroy the earth's ozone
layer
a wall of quickly moving sand dust and
dirt covers the sky
it's hard to breathe and impossible to
see a thing
dust storms or sand storms mostly happen
in arid regions
bring lung problems can carry spores of
infections
and mess up the infrastructure if it
ever catches you driving your best bet
is to stop and wait for the storm to
pass
there are things that look dangerous but
aren't so in the least
one example of this every once in a
while
red rain falls in different parts of the
world
it leaves behind a thin layer of reddish
dust on cars and buildings
it looks sinister but in fact can do you
no harm
the sand it carries from the sahara
gives it this shade
penitenti seem like creepy white fingers
spread across
high altitudes in places like the
atakuma desert in south america
in reality they're made of snow and ice
and are perfectly harmless
and this is a good place to stop nice to
end on
perfectly harmless